CHAPTERS XVI-XVIII OF ISAIAH
This is a LibriVox recording. All LibriVox recordings are in the public domain. For more information or to volunteer, please visit LibriVox.org.
Recording by Simon Wainwright
The Book of Isaiah, King James Version
Chapter 16
Senyi, the lamb, to the ruler of the land, from Sila to the wilderness, unto the mount of the daughter of Zion. For it shall be that as a wandering bird cast out of the nest, so the daughters of Moab shall be at the fords of Arnon.
Take counsel. Execute judgment. Make thy shadow as the night in the midst of the noonday. Hide the outcast. Be ray, not him that wandereth.
Let mine outcast dwell with thee, Moab. Be thou a covert to them from the face of the spoiler. For the extortioner is at an end. The spoiler ceaseth. The oppressors are consumed out of the land.
And in mercy shall the throne be established, and he shall sit upon it in truth, in the tabernacle of David judging, and seeking judgment, and hasting righteousness. We have heard of the pride of Moab. He is very proud even of his haughtiness, and his pride and his wrath, but his lies shall not be so.
Therefore shall Moab howl for Moab. Everyone shall howl for the foundations of Kir-her-es-eth. Shall ye mourn? Surely they are stricken.
For the fields of Heshbon languish, and the vine of Sibmah. The lords of the heathen have broken down the principal plants thereof. They are come even to Jazer. They wandered through the wilderness. Her branches are stretched out. They are gone over the sea.
Therefore I will bewail with the weeping of Jazer, the vine of Sibmah. I will water thee with my tears, O Heshbon and Iliela, for the shouting of thy summer fruits, and for thy harvest is fallen.
And gladness is taken away, and joy out of the plentiful field, and in the vineyards there shall be no singing, neither shall there be shouting. The treaders shall tread out no wine in their presses. I have made their vintage shouting to cease.
Wherefore my bowels shall sound like an arp for Moab, and mine inward parts for Kir-her-esh. And it shall come to pass when it is seen that Moab is weary, on the high place that he shall come to his sanctuary to pray, but he shall not prevail.
This is the word that the Lord hath spoken concerning Moab since that time. But now the Lord hath spoken, saying, Within three years, as the years of inhiling and the glory of Moab shall be condemned, with all that great multitude and the remnant shall be very small and feeble.
The burden of Damascus. Behold, Damascus is taken away from being a city, and it shall be a ruinous heap. The cities of Aurora are forsaken. They shall be for flocks which shall lie down, and none shall make them afraid.
The fortress also shall cease from Ephraim, and the kingdom from Damascus, and the remnant of Syria, they shall be as the glory of the children of Israel, saith the Lord of hosts.
And in that day it shall come to pass, that the glory of Jacob shall be made thin, and the fatness of his flesh shall wax lean. And it shall be as when the harvest man gathereth the corn, and reapeth the ears with his arm, and it shall be as he that gathereth ears in the valley of Rephaim.
Yet gleaning grapes shall be left in it, as the shaking of an olive tree, two or three berries in the top of the uppermost bough, four or five in the outmost fruitful branches thereof, saith the Lord God of Israel.
At that day shall a man look to his Maker, and his eyes shall have respect to the Holy One of Israel. And he shall not look to the altars, the work of his hands, neither shall respect that which his fingers have made, either the grooves or the images.
In that day shall his strong cities be as a forsaken bough, and an uppermost branch which they left because of the children of Israel, and there shall be desolation.
Because thou hast forgotten the Lord of thy salvation, and hast not been mindful of the rock of thy strength, therefore shalt thou plant pleasant plants, and shalt set it with strange slips.
In the day shalt thou make thy plant to grow, and in the morning shalt thou make thy seed to flourish. But the harvest shall be a heap in the day of grief and of desperate sorrow.
Woe to the multitude of many people which make a noise like the noise of the seas, and to the rushing of nations that make a rushing like the rushing of mighty waters.
The nations shall rush like the rushing of many waters, but God shall rebuke them, and they shall flee far off, and shall be chased as the shape of the mountains before the wind, and like a rolling thing before the whirlwind.
And behold, at even tide trouble, and before the morning he is not. This is the portion of them that spoil us, and the lot of them that rob us.
Woe to the land shadowing with wings, which is beyond the rivers of Ethiopia, that sendeth ambassadors by the sea, even in vessels of bull rushes upon the waters, saying,
Go ye swift messengers, to a nation scattered and peeled, to a people terrible from their beginning hitherto, a nation meted out and trodden down, whose land the rivers have spoiled.
All ye inhabitants of the world and dwellers on the earth, see ye when he lifteth up an ensign on the mountains, and when he bloweth the trumpet, hear ye.
For so the Lord said unto me, I will take my rest, and I will consider in my dwelling place a clear heat upon herbs, and like a cloud of dew in the heat of harvest.
For afore the harvest, when the bud is perfect, and the sour grape is ripening in the flower, he shall both cut off the sprigs with pruning hooks, and take away and cut down the branches.
They shall be left together unto the fowls of the mountains, and to the beasts of the earth, and the fowls shall summer upon them, and all the beasts of the earth shall winter upon them.
In that time shall the present be brought unto the Lord of hosts, of a people scattered and peeled, and from a people terrible from their beginning hitherto, a nation meted out and trodden underfoot, whose land the rivers have spoiled.
To the place of the name of the Lord of hosts, the Mount of Zion. End of chapters 16 through 18. Recording by Simon Wainwright.